Many people buy organic food hoping to feel healthier, and potentially have a positive impact on the environment. But are organic foods even better for you and the environment in the first place? For plants, the term organic basically means something grown without the use of synthetic fertilizers or pesticides, but this is a little bit misleading. You see, many consumers buy organic to avoid pesticides all together, but the truth is, organic farmers can still use pesticides and fungicides to prevent insects from destroying their crops, they just can’t be synthetically made. There are over 20 chemicals approved for organic use in the US derived from natural sources like plants, but studies have shown that some natural pesticides are actually a more serious health and environmental risk than man-made ones. Not to say they are all bad, but simply that, ‘natural’ doesn’t always mean better for you or the environment. On top of this, not all organic foods are completely organic. If a label simply says ‘organic’ it only has to contain 95% organic ingredients. The label “made with organic ingredients” on items like bread may only contain 70%, while “containing organic ingredients” may only have 50%. Only when a label says “100% Organic” does it contain purely organic ingredients. For what it’s worth, the term “free range” also only requires evidence of access to the outdoors for a minimum of 5 minutes per day. Huh! Interestingly, a meta-analysis conducted in 2012 found that organic crop yields are 25% lower on average than conventional ones, though differences vary greatly between types of crops. For example, organic vegetable yields are typically 33% lower than conventional ones, putting a greater strain on the natural environment as more farmland is required. However, organic legume yields are only 5% lower, as they are more efficient at absorbing nitrogen from organic fertilizers. Of course, many organic farming practices like crop rotations and mixed planting as opposed to using mono-cultures are better for the soil and the environment. But are they better for you? After analyzing 237 studies, researchers concluded that organic fruit and veggies are no more nutritious than conventionally grown food. However, long-term studies of purely-organic diets are difficult, as most people eat a mixture of foods with non-organic ingredients. Those on short-term organic diets do show higher levels of carotenoids, polyphenols, Vitamin C and E, LDL cholesterol, antioxidant activity, immune system markers, and ever higher semen quality. But, the differences are clinically insignificant. Children placed on organic diets for ten days have lower levels of organophosphates in their urine, which in higher concentrations are associated with neurological problems, but both levels are orders of magnitude lower than the amount needed to cause clinical harm. And just because something is organic, doesn’t make it better. An bag of organic chips, for example, is still just deep fried carbohydrates with very little nutritional value. Most surprising is that organic food has a higher incidence of being dangerous. Though organic foods accounts for only 1% of agricultural acreage or space, they account for 7% of recalled food units in 2015. For example, this year several flavours of Clif Bars were recalled from stores due to organic sunflower kernels that were potentially contaminated with listeria - a bacterium which kills hundreds in the US each year. Another study found E.coli in 10% of organic produce, compared to 2% in conventional ones. The truth is, eating organic foods can be good for you, and in some ways be better for the environment, but it’s not the be all and end all. Production methods vary greatly for both organic and conventional foods, from one farm to another - or from local farms to factory farms - and it’s likely a combination of methods that will lead to the greatest results for your health and the environment. Organic and conventional foods can co-exist and don’t have to be at odds with one another - anyone who tells you with 100% certainty one way is fully better than the other is ignoring the science. When it comes to your own health, it’s really a combination of diet, exercise, various other lifestyle choices, and of course, your genetics! Red meat is an excellent source of protein and essential nutrients such as iron, zinc, vitamin B12 and omega-3 fats, which are are linked to heart and brain health. But while a small quantity of lean meat may be good for us, too much red or processed meat can increase our risk of some cancers. Australia’s dietary guidelines therefore recommend limiting lean red meat consumption to a maximum of 455g per week, which equates to three to four small pieces of cooked meat the size of the palm of your hand. Organic farming and grass feeding are promoted as having some social and environmental benefits compared with conventionally produced red meats. However, are they any healthier? Organic vs non-organic Organic produce is generally grown without synthetic pesticides, herbicides, growth hormones or the use of antibiotics. Certified foods have met the Australian government standards for organic produce, although there is no one legal definition of “organic”. Organic farming can still use naturally occurring pesticides such as copper, sulfur and pyrethrins (pesticide-producing bacteria) which can also be harmful in large doses. However, levels of both synthetic and natural pesticides are low and well below recommended levels. These levels are monitored and enforced under the Australian Food Standards code. Organic agriculture doesn’t use antibiotics to promote livestock growth. This is considered an important strategy in addressing the transmission of antibiotic-resistant bacteria to the environment and the food supply chain. Studies of the bacterial contamination of organic versus conventional meat suggest that organic meat may slightly be more contaminated. However, conventional meat might become more contaminated with antibiotic-resistant bacteria; though the evidence is inconclusive. From a nutritional perspective, some organic meats have the potential to contain more omega-3 fatty acids. This is because organic livestock are more likely to be fed a forage-based diet such as grass, producing slightly higher omega-3 levels than grain feeding. However, a review of the research found little overall evidence of a difference. It’s also unclear if these small differences translate into health benefits in the context of a balanced diet. A key downside of organic meat is the higher cost. Estimates vary from one-and-a-half to twice as much as conventional meat, although the growth in organic agriculture could see prices fall. Overall, the quality and nutrition value of non-organic and organic Australian meats is comparable. But some consumers will opt for organic meat for environmental and social reasons. Hormone-free Australian guidelines allow the use of growth hormones to increase the weight of cattle. The hormones most commonly used as growth promoters – oestrogen, progesterone and testosterone – also occur naturally in a wide range of foods. However, the difference in hormone levels between hormone-fed and hormone-free beef is small. A single consumer would need to eat more than 77 kilograms of beef from a hormone-treated animal in one sitting to get the same level of oestrogen hormone found in one egg. Hormone levels are regulated nationally to ensure that they are safe for consumers and not harmful to animals. However, if you prefer it, hormone-free beef is widely available from supermarkets and butchers. Grain or grass fed Grass-fed meat comes from animals that have only grazed on grass. The type of grass varies depending on climate and region. Grain-fed meat comes from animals that are fed grass for part of their lives (variable duration) and then given a grain-based diet for the remainder, depending on market requirements and seasonal conditions. This is also referred to as “grain finishing”. Livestock are grain-fed for several reasons, including: maintaining a consistent supply of meat; meeting market demand for marbled meat; increasing animal size; and providing sufficient feed when pasture is limited by conditions such as drought. The main nutritional difference between the two is that grass-fed meat has a higher concentration of desirable omega-3 fats and potentially fat-soluble vitamins A and E. However, the omega-3 content even in grass-fed beef is small compared to omega-3-rich foods such as salmon. Grass-fed beef contains around 90 milligrams per 100 grams, whereas salmon contains approximately 1.6-2.7g per 100g. The omega-3 content of meat depends on the type of grass the animal consumed. An Australian study comparing meat from cattle grain-fed for 80 days with grass-fed animals found that grain feeding reduced omega-3 content in Australian beef, while increasing levels of trans and saturated fats. It also found cattle that were grain-fed for longer periods had a higher total fat content. To be eligible to use the “certified pasture fed” label in Australia, cattle must have had access to graze in pasture for their entire lives and not be confined to feedlots for the purposes of intensive feeding. Certified pasture-fed producers may also be certified as free from growth hormones and antibiotics. The downside is that you can expect to pay more for the meat, as raising cattle entirely on grass is more time-consuming and expensive. Wagyu beef Wagyu is a breed of cattle known for its highly marbled meat, with fat inside the muscle. As the duration and type of feed determine the overall fat content, meat from Wagyu cattle fed a grain-based diet for more than 300 days will be highly marbled and high in fat. A higher fat content means more kilojoules, but Wagyu tends to have a better ratio of unsaturated to saturated fats than regular beef. A diet lower in saturated fats is better for your heart, provided that you eat appropriate portion sizes. Again, the higher cost of wagyu beef may be prohibitive. MSA grade MSA refers to Meat Standards Australia, which classifies meats according to a range of variables including colour, acidity, and fat marbling, as well as production variables. For cuts of beef and lamb to be MSA-graded, certain standards must be maintained to ensure tenderness, juiciness and flavour. They are then labelled according to a recommended cooking method. MSA-grade meat reflects how it was produced rather than the nutritional profile of the meat. Lean or low-fat Cuts of meat with more meaningful labels such as “lean” generally contain no more than 10g of fat per 100g. “Low-fat” products must contain less that 3g fat per 100g. Choosing lean cuts of meat will reduce your intake of saturated and total dietary fats, with benefits for cardiovascular health. The term “premium” is not a regulated term under the food standards code and as such can be used by food suppliers to describe their product according to their own definition of quality. Free-range and RSPCA-approved There is no legislation covering “free-range” meats. These terms reflect the producers’ adherence to guidelines aimed at ensuring the humane treatment of animals. They don’t reflect the nutritional profile or health impacts, but rather the social and ethical considerations for consumers. The nutritional profile of free-range meats is likely to reflect the diets of the cattle. Bottom line There may be slight nutritional differences between organic and grass-fed meat compared with non-organic and grain-fed varieties, but based on current evidence it’s unlikely to make a substantial difference to our health. It’s up to you whether you want to pay more for meat that accords with your social and environmental values. Organic food may come with less pesticides but there’s little evidence it’s better for you, say researchers from Stanford University. In a study published today in Annals of Internal Medicine, Dena Bravata from Stanford’s Centre for Health Policy argues there isn’t much difference between organic and conventional foods if consumers are making a decision based solely on their health. The researchers analysed 237 papers including studies of populations consuming organic and conventional diets, and studies that compared either the nutrient levels or the bacterial, fungal or pesticide contamination of various vegetables and meats grown organically and conventionally. “Some believe that organic food is always healthier and more nutritious,” said study author Crystal Smith-Spangler, who is an instructor of medicine at Stanford. “We were a little surprised that we didn’t find that.” Based on their review of the health outcomes, nutrition and safety of organic and conventional foods, the study authors argued there is limited evidence for the superiority of organic foods. “The evidence does not suggest marked health benefits from consuming organic versus conventional foods,” they wrote in the report. The study did however find that organic produce is 30% less likely to be contaminated with pesticides than conventional fruits and vegetables. “Our research shows organic consumers are more interested in what’s not in their food - such as pesticides and antibiotics - than what is,” said Liza Oates, who is currently researching the health effects of organic diets at RMIT University. “This review has confirmed that organic foods have lower levels of pesticide residues and antibiotic-resistant bacteria. The fact that they failed to find strong evidence that organic foods have more nutrients is relatively predictable,” Ms Oates said. She added that research in the US has shown eating organic food has a dramatic effect on pesticide residues in children. “Substituting non-organic fruits and vegetables with organics for five days resulted in an almost complete reduction in organophosphate pesticide residues.” However Tim Crowe, associate professor of nutrition at Deakin University, said pesticide levels are always checked in Australia and found to be within safe limits. Professor Crowe said while there’s a very strong perception that organic foods are going to be much better for us, and for our health, studies have found little evidence of a major difference. “The biggest health problems facing Australians are to do with over consumption of food, not inadequate consumption of fruit and vegetables,” Professor Crowe said. If you get a feel good health effect from eating organic fruit and vegetables, by all means eat them, but I’d be more worried about eating five serves of fruit and veg a day rather than eating organic food.“ But taste, environmental benefits, and animal welfare issues are other important aspects of organically grown food said Rosemary Stanton, nutritionist and visiting fellow at University of New South Wales. "Animal welfare is a major issue for many people and reducing use of pesticides is always wise. Many permissable pesticide residue limits have been reduced over time,” Dr Stanton said. She said taste is another factor with some studies showing better taste from organically produced foods, although added this is a difficult area and may also reflect the varieties of crops grown in large commercial conventional farming versus the varieties that may be grown by smaller organic farmers. “I think in home, school and community gardens, organically grown produce is definitely to be preferred since exposure of growers to chemical substances can be problematic and the general public has no training in appropriate use of pesticides.” “Organic” is more than just a passing fad. Organic food sales totaled a record US$45.2 billion in 2017, making it one of the fastest-growing segments of American agriculture. While a small number of studies have shown associations between organic food consumption and decreased incidence of disease, no studies to date have been designed to answer the question of whether organic food consumption causes an improvement in health. I’m an environmental health scientist who has spent over 20 years studying pesticide exposures in human populations. Last month, my research group published a small study that I believe suggests a path forward to answering the question of whether eating organic food actually improves health. What we don’t know According to the USDA, the organic label does not imply anything about health. In 2015, Miles McEvoy, then chief of the National Organic Program for USDA, refused to speculate about any health benefits of organic food, saying the question wasn’t “relevant” to the National Organic Program. Instead, the USDA’s definition of organic is intended to indicate production methods that “foster cycling of resources, promote ecological balance, and conserve biodiversity.” While some organic consumers may base their purchasing decisions on factors like resource cycling and biodiversity, most report choosing organic because they think it’s healthier. Sixteen years ago, I was part of the first study to look at the potential for an organic diet to reduce pesticide exposure. This study focused on a group of pesticides called organophosphates, which have consistently been associated with negative effects on children’s brain development. We found that children who ate conventional diets had nine times higher exposure to these pesticides than children who ate organic diets. Our study got a lot of attention. But while our results were novel, they didn’t answer the big question. As I told The New York Times in 2003, “People want to know, what does this really mean in terms of the safety of my kid? But we don’t know. Nobody does.” Maybe not my most elegant quote, but it was true then, and it’s still true now. Studies only hint at potential health benefits Since 2003, several researchers have looked at whether a short-term switch from a conventional to an organic diet affects pesticide exposure. These studies have lasted one to two weeks and have repeatedly shown that “going organic” can quickly lead to dramatic reductions in exposure to several different classes of pesticides. Still, scientists can’t directly translate these lower exposures to meaningful conclusions about health. The dose makes the poison, and organic diet intervention studies to date have not looked at health outcomes. The same is true for the other purported benefits of organic food. Organic milk has higher levels of healthy omega fatty acids and organic crops have higher antioxidant activity than conventional crops. But are these differences substantial enough to meaningfully impact health? We don’t know. Nobody does. Some epidemiologic research has been directed at this question. Epidemiology is the study of the causes of health and disease in human populations, as opposed to in specific people. Most epidemiologic studies are observational, meaning that researchers look at a group of people with a certain characteristic or behavior, and compare their health to that of a group without that characteristic or behavior. In the case of organic food, that means comparing the health of people who choose to eat organic to those who do not. Several observational studies have shown that people who eat organic food are healthier than those who eat conventional diets. A recent French study followed 70,000 adults for five years and found that those who frequently ate organic developed 25% fewer cancers than those who never ate organic. Other observational studies have shown organic food consumption to be associated with lower risk of diabetes, metabolic syndrome, pre-eclampsia and genital birth defects. The problem with drawing firm conclusions from these studies is something epidemiologists call “uncontrolled confounding.” This is the idea that there may be differences between groups that researchers cannot account for. In this case, people who eat organic food are more highly educated, less likely to be overweight or obese, and eat overall healthier diets than conventional consumers. While good observational studies take into account things like education and diet quality, there remains the possibility that some other uncaptured difference between the two groups – beyond the decision to consume organic food – may be responsible for any health differences observed. What next? When clinical researchers want to figure out whether a drug works, they don’t do observational studies. They conduct randomized trials, where they randomly assign some people to take the drug and others to receive placebos or standard care. By randomly assigning people to groups, there’s less potential for uncontrolled confounding. My research group’s recently published study shows how we could feasibly use randomized trial methods to investigate the potential for organic food consumption to affect health. We recruited a small group of pregnant women during their first trimesters. We randomly assigned them to receive weekly deliveries of either organic or conventional produce throughout their second and third trimesters. We then collected a series of urine samples to assess pesticide exposure. We found that those women who received organic produce had significantly lower exposure to certain pesticides (specifically, pyrethroid insecticides) than those who received conventional produce. On the surface, this seems like old news but this study was different in three important ways. First, to our knowledge, it was the longest organic diet intervention to date – by far. It was also the first to occur in pregnant women. Fetal development is potentially the most sensitive period for exposures to neurotoxic agents like pesticides. Finally, in previous organic diet intervention studies, researchers typically changed participants’ entire diets – swapping a fully conventional diet for a fully organic one. In our study, we asked participants to supplement their existing diets with either organic or conventional produce. This is more consistent with the actual dietary habits of most people who eat organic food – occasionally, but not always. Even with just a partial dietary change, we observed a significant difference in pesticide exposure between the two groups. We believe that this study shows that a long-term organic diet intervention can be executed in a way that is effective, realistic and feasible. The next step is to do this same study but in a larger population. We would then want to assess whether there were any resulting differences in the health of the children as they grew older, by measuring neurological outcomes like IQ, memory and incidence of attention-deficit disorders. By randomly assigning women to the organic and conventional groups, we could be sure any differences observed in their children’s health really were due to diet, rather than other factors common among people who consume organic food. The public is sufficiently interested in this question, the organic market is large enough, and the observational studies suggestive enough to justify such a study. Right now, we don’t know if an organic diet improves health, but based on our recent research, I believe we can find out. Food is an emotional topic. Everyone cares about what they eat. Food often has a strong cultural, religious or even political meaning attached to it. Organic food is no different in that respect. People buy organic out of hedonistic values of pleasure and health as well as out of altruistic values of environmental sustainability, social justice and animal welfare. In addition, organic food is also part of the political debate on how to feed the world sustainably today and into the future. Agriculture is currently one of the major threats to the environment. We know that some drastic changes in our food system are needed if we want to ensure that the many hungry people on this planet have access to sufficient nutritious food and at the same time reduce the environmental impact of agriculture. Organic agriculture is often proposed as a solution to some of these challenges. It promises to produce food in a more environmentally friendly way and to provide accessible means of increasing yields in smallholder farming systems in developing countries. We were therefore not surprised that our study about the yields of organic agriculture, published recently in Nature, drew quite some attention and was discussed widely in the media and blogosphere. In this study, we conducted a meta-analysis comparing organic and conventional yields and examined how the yield difference is influenced by different site and system characteristics. The analysis basically showed that organic yields are generally lower than conventional yields, but that under some conditions organic yields can nearly match conventional. While we anticipated that the study would receive widespread attention, we were not really prepared for the wide range of interpretations of our analysis. Some people interpreted the study to imply that organic food was bad for the environment. Others concluded that we had totally missed the point, as the issue was not about yields anyway. So, first a disclaimer: we did not attempt to solve the food problems of the world in our study. We evaluated the yield difference between organic and conventional systems using data that had been published in the scientific literature. Not more, not less. We looked at the yield question, as we believe that yields are an important variable to consider when assessing different farming systems. In the end, whatever you might hold against current conventional agriculture, we have to acknowledge that its high yields have spared land for nature and have improved the food situation of many people. But we acknowledge (and we do that throughout our article) that yields are only one of many factors we need to consider. Farming systems do not only have to provide food but they also have to use natural resources responsibly and to provide livelihoods to farmers. And the question of feeding the world is even more complicated than that. Feeding the world today does not depend on the total food produced: at the global aggregate scale we currently have enough food to feed everyone. It depends on where this food is produced and at what price. Hunger today is a problem of insufficient access to nutritious food and not of insufficient food availability (although feeding an additional 2-3 billion in the future may require increases in production). So what message can people take away from our study? The real conclusion of our study is not an easy conclusion of “yes organic” or “no organic”. Although we did mention the overall average yield difference between organic and conventional systems derived from our data, this was not the main point of our study. Our main contribution was to identify situations where organic performs well and also those situations where there is still a large yield gap to conventional systems. Instead of giving an absolute yes or no answer, we tried to paint a more nuanced picture of the complex and difficult reality of organic farming. Our study has shown that organic agriculture requires good management practices for high yield performance; that organic performs better under rainfed conditions and weakly acidic to alkaline soils; and that its performance improves over time. The study has also shown that nitrogen limitation is an issue in organic systems and that we need to improve organic cereal and vegetable management. Here we have two choices. We can improve organic yields by putting more money into organic research (given the little funding organic research has received to date). Or we can turn to conventional practices, which under these conditions may be more environmentally beneficial because of their land sparing effect. An important knowledge gap we identified is the performance of organic agriculture in smallholder farming systems in developing countries. These are the places where yield increases are most needed and where organic agriculture could potentially provide an important tool for sustainable intensification of farming. Research in these systems is urgently needed. Organic agriculture has a role to play in sustainable food production. We can adopt organic farming methods under conditions where it performs best, try to address the identified issues in organic farming systems and we can learn from successful organic practices for conventional systems. In the end, to achieve sustainable food systems we need agriculture that can deliver certain desirable outcomes. And these desirable outcomes might require a blend of different practices, including agro-ecological methods that improve soil fertility and enhance biodiversity as well as targeted use of chemical fertilisers to ensure high crop production. We hope that with our study we have revealed some of the many shades of grey inherent in the debate about how to feed the world sustainably. Science cannot provide a definite answer on what the best farming system is. But it is not about the correct answer or the correct choice anyway. It is about making the best choice with the information we have. And making these best choices in our complex world requires us to critically evaluate the performance of different farming systems along certain key variables, assessing the associated uncertainties and identifying knowledge gaps. The same is true from a consumer perspective. Instead of sticking to any single mantra and eating only organic food, only local or only vegetarian, we should do what we do anyway: eat from a diversity of sources following our diverse set of values and trying to do the best with the information we have. This might include buying organic milk from large-scale organic dairy farms to avoid antibiotic residues. It might mean buying conventional apples from a local family farm in support of the local economy. It might mean buying cheap flour from highly productive conventional cereal farmers. Or it might include the organic veggie basket from our local family farm with its diverse polyculture of vegetables produced with utmost care and a large portion of idealism. You’re at the supermarket, and you need to pick up a few ingredients for your favorite stew. Do you buy the organic carrots, potatoes and beef? Or do you skip the upcharge and stick with the conventional stuff? There’s a lot of confusion over what organic means, and whether it makes sense to buy food with that label. Legally, organic food has to meet a variety of regulations having to do with how it was produced, including no synthetic fertilizers, no antibiotics or hormones, no food irradiation or genetic engineering, and most appetizing of all, no sewage sludge. Which might sound good. Less sewage sludge, that’s always better. But whether these regulations are actually meaningful isn’t always clear. So far, there’s no evidence that organic foods are healthier, as many people claim. And while they do offer some environmental benefits, they also come with some costs. So today, we’re diving into the complicated world of organic farming to help you make sense of the labels and figure out what should make it into your grocery cart. To chemists, of course, “organic” means a molecule or compound that has carbon in it. But when you’re talking about food from the grocery store, “organic” is a legal term for marketing purposes. Without a standards program, anyone could use that word and it would be meaningless. In the U.S., organic certification requires farmers to grow crops without chemical fertilizers and to use a limited number of pesticides. They also have to rotate crops, which is basically growing different plants on the same plot of land throughout the year. And they can’t grow GMOs, or genetically modified organisms. This generally means they’ve had their DNA altered in a lab, often by adding a new gene from a different organism. For meat and dairy products to qualify as organic, the animals must be given organic feed. Cows and other ruminants that naturally eat grass have to be able to graze for at least a third of the year, and animals like pigs and chickens need to have the option to go outside. Just like me, I have the option, do I take it? Vets also can’t give these animals antibiotics or growth hormones. And there are a few other quirky provisions, like not using certain food sterilization techniques, and specific terminology if you’re only using some organic ingredients in your product. But that’s the gist. The rules are similar in other nations, enough that many countries have so-called equivalency agreements that allow organic food in one nation to count as organic in another, although there are exceptions. The U.S., for instance, has equivalency agreements with Canada, the EU, and Japan. Now, the whole idea of organic food is to be easier on the planet. And in many ways, organic food does that. No chemical fertilizers means organic farmers typically use manure as a source of nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium. Plants need these nutrients to grow, to make amino acids, DNA, and cell membranes, for example. And normal soil doesn’t have enough to support crop-level growth. Hence, fertilizer. Manure is less environmentally damaging because it takes a lot of energy to make chemical fertilizers, especially the nitrogen-rich ones. They’re one of the largest sources of carbon emissions in the whole farming process. And because manure breaks down more slowly than chemical fertilizers in soil, the nutrients are released more gradually. So with manure, there’s less nitrogen-rich runoff polluting nearby streams and rivers, which lets algae overgrow and kill off fish and other creatures. Less runoff is one of the big selling points of organic agriculture. Crop rotation cuts down on soil erosion and helps with soil quality, too. That’s because growing the same plant again and again saps specific nutrients from the soil. But if you rotate plants with slightly different chemical needs, no one nutrient runs especially low. Rotation also reduces the needs for pesticides because no pest can get especially comfy. Some research also suggests organic farming can support more biodiversity, because fewer pesticides means a more diverse mix of plants and animals can hang around. But the results vary depending on the crop and the conditions, so this finding isn’t for sure. All these benefits are great, and of course non-certified farms can and do practice these kinds of things too. But there are also real downsides to organic farming approaches. The biggest of these has to do with yield. Using different fertilizers and being more susceptible to pests means organic farms aren’t as productive as conventional farms. And that cuts down on how environmentally friendly they are. Because of lower yields, experts estimate that it takes about 25% more farmland to grow organic food than to grow the same amount of regular food. And that space could theoretically be left as a natural forest or other ecosystem. So even though skipping the chemical fertilizer helps with greenhouse gas emissions, these reduced yields mean organic farms aren’t chipping away at the total carbon footprint as much as you might think. Even with researchers still looking into it, it’s hard to say exactly how much. Even if we wanted, we couldn’t just switch all farming over to organic because we wouldn’t be able to feed the entire planet. Ultimately, this comes down to the fact that we wouldn’t be able to make enough manure or other organic fertilizers. Like, it takes a lot of farmland to raise animals that make gobs of nutritious poop. Some of the standards that define organic foods in the U.S. aren’t necessarily helping with sustainability, either. Take the ban on GMOs. GMOs have a bad reputation, but as we’ve talked about before here on SciShow, they’re not inherently bad. And they have a lot of potential to reduce the amount of chemicals needed to grow food. Or sewer sludge. It seems obvious that sewage and food don’t mix. But it turns out that using carefully treated sewage, known as biosolids, might actually be good for farms and the environment. Crops are especially good at absorbing the nitrogen and phosphorus in biosolids, so there’s less runoff than with traditional fertilizer. And, since people poop anyway, we don’t need to increase carbon emissions by making synthetic fertilizer or use more land to rear animals for a bunch of manure. In this case, the organics label prevents a sustainable farming practice, which is kind of a waste. Now, besides caring about the environment, which we should all do, people sometimes buy organic food because it sounds healthier. But there is no evidence that organic food has more nutrients or is better for you in any way. Scientists have checked this repeatedly, since it does make sense that if you have slightly better soil, maybe you’ll get a better apple or pepper. But if you think about it more, that’s asking a lot from a relatively small change. A few studies have found slightly higher levels of certain nutrients, such as antioxidants in produce. But it’s not clear that it’s enough to be a health benefit. And, to be totally transparent, those results have tended to be funded by the organics industry. A 2012 systematic review of 240 studies, for example, didn’t find any significant differences in vitamins or minerals in foods grown with organic and traditional methods, except for one. Phosphorus was higher in organic foods, but it’s unlikely that that difference would matter for us anyway. Phosphorus is in a lot of foods, and deficiencies are really rare. So there’s no compelling case to be made that organic food is better for you. So don’t kid yourself. Eating a whole organic cake is just as bad for you as eating any whole cake, and you don’t get an extra boost by chowing down on an organic banana. The one area where organics do beat conventional foods health-wise is pesticides. But the difference may not be all that meaningful. When tested for pesticide residue, organic food usually comes back with fewer than conventional crops, which makes sense. The whole idea is to use fewer inputs, including pesticides, to grow food. But it’s not zero. The review found that about 7% of the organic foods they tested had detectable pesticides, compared to 38% of conventional foods. It’s possible these small differences matter, but from everything we currently know, it’s unlikely. Virtually all foods are still within the EPA’s safety limits for pesticides, no matter how they’re produced, which we’ve talked about in another video. And you should still be washing all your fruits and veggies to minimize exposure. In terms of preventing food poisoning, organic food also seems to match conventional food. In fact, it turns out that organic regulations forbid a perfectly good technique that could protect us against foodborne illness called food irradiation. It’s not used much in conventional food, either, but some food scientists think it should be used much more widely. Irradiation might sound scary, like, is my grape gonna become a radioactive grape and then I’m gonna eat it and become Grape Man? but it’s not like the food becomes radioactive and dangerous. The CDC, the WHO, and the USDA all agree that food that’s been irradiated is safe. Basically, ionizing radiation is used to break chemical bonds and kill contaminants like bacteria. That makes the food last longer and makes it safer to eat. Irradiation doesn’t solve all problems, like, toxins can still build up in food before a pathogen gets the axe. Plus, it can reduce some nutrients and some people say it can change the taste of foods ever so slightly. Because it reduces spoilage, it’s possible irradiated food could be older when you buy it compared with non-irradiated food. Critics also say irradiation can cover up poor farming practices. But the fact remains that irradiation is very effective for food safety. If you want to avoid getting sick from something you eat, it might be your best option. The proof is in the pudding; hospital pudding, that is. Hospitals regularly irradiate food to make sure patients with weakened immune systems don’t get taken down by a bit of Staph. NASA also irradiates the meat it sends into space to feed astronauts. You know, because nobody wants diarrhea in space. That sounds terrible. Irradiation is particularly useful for foods that are hard to properly clean before eating, like sprouts, shellfish, and things like spices. In fact, in recent years, organic spices have been a big food safety offender, because of contamination from microbes like Salmonella. So, despite what you may have heard, organic doesn’t always mean safer, and at the end of the day, whether you should buy organic food isn’t a question science can definitely answer. You shouldn’t buy it because it’s healthier or tastier, that much is clear. But the truth is that while organic food includes some great sustainable farming practices, it excludes some others. That's unfortunate, because if I'm going to pay extra for an organic apple, I'd really like to know it's eco-friendly. And right now, you can't necessarily tell that by looking at the label. Thanks for watching this episode of SciShow, and thank you especially to our Patrons on patreon who make posting videos 7 days a week possible. People sometimes ask us, is a dollar or two on Patreon really helpful? Yes! Yes, it is. Over 2,000 people support SciShow with a dollar a month and that adds up to a very important part of our operating budget. We could not make this channel without our Patrons, so thank you. [♪ OUTRO]
Getting tangled up in two different sets of regulations can be a headache — or even worse, a reason to choose one part of your business over another.

That can be the case if you’re an organic farmer, especially a small- or mid-sized one already following food safety regulations. You can’t just turn the record-keeping required by both programs over to someone else, as can happen on large farms flush with cash. 
To begin with, you know you have to produce food free from foodborne pathogens that can make people sick. That’s a given. Yet, to be able to sell your food as organic, you have to follow specific rules and farming practices, some of which require keeping soil in good condition without the use of synthetic fertilizers or pesticides and steering clear of genetically modified seeds.
The bottom line is that consumers want to know the food has been raised in a way that doesn’t harm the environment or potentially poison them. Or get them sick. In other words, you have to deal with two sets of regulations —and two sets of regulators. It’s not an easy task to juggle by anyone’s reckoning. Not to mention the time and cost of doing this.
With that in mind, the USDA recently awarded a $3.5 million USDA Organic Agriculture Research and Extension Initiative (OREI) grant to help reduce food safety barriers for organic specialty crop growers.
Specialty crops are fruits and vegetables, tree nuts, and dried fruits grown to be used by people for food or medicinal purposes.
In contrast, commodity crops are not grown for direct consumption but for sale to a commodity market. The most common commodity crops in the United States are corn, soybeans, and wheat. They are often used for animal feed or can sometimes end up in human food by being processed as fillers and sweeteners. For the most part, these are the crops that get federal subsidies.
Why the grant?’
Through discussions with The Organic Center (https://www.organic-center.org), the Organic Trade Association (ota.com), and people who have a vested interest in the organic industry, it became apparent that food-safety management was particularly challenging for organic farmers for various administrative and operational reasons, said Amber Sciligo, The Organic Center’s director of science programs.
With that reality before them, The Organic Center put together a team of scientists and food safety experts to submit a grant proposal that would allow for a national needs assessment to be conducted. From there, based on that assessment, it would allow for developing a research program to address the most significant challenges identified in the needs assessment.
The planning grant was awarded, and Sciligo and her co-lead, Dr. Patrick Baur, assistant professor in sustainable agriculture and food systems at the University of Rhode Island, conducted the national needs assessment.

In that assessment, they found that most organic growers surveyed who currently or had previously held pre-harvest food safety certifications reported administrative or operational barriers in complying with the National Organic Program (NOP) and food safety standards.
Some organic growers pointed to compliance costs, water testing for microbial pathogen contamination, effects of livestock proximity, record keeping, and the food safety risk of compost and other organic soil amendments as the most significant barriers to meeting NOP and food safety requirements.
While compost — the result of the natural breakdown of leaves, manures, and other organic materials— is a rich source of nutrients, if not managed right, it can be a potential source of food-borne pathogens such as Salmonella and E. Coli as well as other bacteria, viruses, and parasites.
Managing compost involves making sure the compost pile is hot enough to kill the pathogens and also turning the compost pile at suitable intervals so all the components reach a high enough temperature to kill the pathogens. Not surprisingly, this can be a time-consuming and complicated process that calls for due diligence to ensure the pathogens and other harmful components are killed before the nutrient-rich compost is applied to the soil where crops will be grown.
Some of the grant money will be used to develop a “tool” farmers can use for compost in a way that ensures it can be used to enrich the soil where crops are grown safely.
The major concern
Sciligo clarified that this new grant did not arise from concerns about food safety in organic produce production.
“The major concern here is not that organic farmers won’t continue to grow food safely but rather that they won’t continue to grow certified organic food,” she said.
“To ensure that we can keep growing the amount of organic acreage in the US, we are trying to alleviate barriers that farmers face in complying with food safety and organic regulations — we don’t want them to have to choose.”
She said in the case of limited resources such as money, time, and knowledge. “we’ve heard farmers say that they will choose to get certified for their food safety management over organic certification. But we want organic farmers to be able to remain certified while also satisfying food safety requirements.” 
“We have robust policies designed to deliver safe, organic food through the National Organic Program and the Food Safety Modernization Act,” Baur said. “But on the ground, these policy worlds don’t always speak the same language or work together. The burden falls on organic farmers to deal with all the resulting tensions.”

He said they’re developing new communication and training tools aimed at the fruit and vegetable sector “to build a shared language between organic agriculture and the food safety community and help them work better together.”
With that in mind, Baur said that holding regional workshops that will allow farmers and regulators from both programs to share their concerns and questions will do a lot to get the players on the same page.
The workshops are slated for 2026 and 2027. They will be in the four USDA Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education (SARE) regions, with highly active organic regions like the West having more than one workshop.
The Organic Center will also host two webinars for organic certifiers and food safety auditors in 2026 and 2027 to share the project’s results, explain how to use the decision-making tool for organic soil amendments, and preview a series of online training modules.
“We expect that challenges to comply with food safety regulations and NOP regulations simultaneously will likely vary by crop and region as food safety risks are impacted by things like climate and typical operation scale and crop composition,” Sciligo said. 
“It will be good for food-safety regulators to know more about the parts of the National Organics Program that cause tension and for the organic program certifiers to know more about the food-safety requirements, said Baur. “It’s all about filling the gaps. We must recognize when the two may be speaking past one another.”
This is important, he said, because while organic demand is increasing, organic acreage is not. 
According to an article in the Associated Press, over the past several decades, demand for organics has increased so fast that it has begun outstripping the supply produced in the United States. With that came the realization that even though consumers are willing to pay higher prices for organic food, the challenge is convincing enough farmers to get past their apprehensions about going organic, especially considering the extra revenue it can bring in.
Also to keep in mind is the growth of organic produce imported from other countries into the United States.
In 2021, domestic production of organic products — fruits, vegetables and herbs — added up to 2,035 million pounds, according to ProducePay. But the amount coming into the U.S. from other countries came to 1,684 million pounds.
In the U.S., the main organic produce was apples (31.1 percent), strawberries (9.5 percent), oranges (6.9 percent), romaine lettuce (6.7 percent), and potatoes (6.2 percent. In the case of trade, the most imported organic produce were bananas (53.1 percent), avocados( 7.7 percent), mangoes (5.8 percent), blueberries (5 percent), and squash (4.3 percent). The most exported were apples (80 percent), pears (14.4 percent), cherries (4.0 percent), dried onions (1.5 percent) and potatoes (0.2 percent).
The consumer and ag’s voice
“I think it’s a good thing,” said Tom Kennedy, a consumer and an organic gardener from Bellingham, WA. “I’d like to see all food organic. We need more organic acreage.”
He also pointed to earlier times when it was common for farmers to use many chemicals.
“No one thought twice about it then,” he said. “But those chemicals can get people sick and into the soil and the air.
As for him, he said he eats organically whenever he can “because it’s healthier.”
“The more we can explain the regulations, the better,” said Linda Neunzig, a livestock farmer and also the agriculture coordinator for Snohomish County. “ It will help alleviate any misunderstandings. Having a common understanding is always a good thing.”
But she acknowledged that it can be a “spiderweb” to figure it all out.
Currently, she raises only livestock, but in the past, she also grew to produce that she raised organically and sold directly to customers.
“I never got certified organic,” she said. “There was too much cost and record keeping involved.”
When referring to the grant, Baur said that at the end of the day, the goal is to serve the consumers’ best interests. 
“We’re confident this will have real value,” he said
What Does 'Organic' Mean?
Food labels can be surprisingly complicated to understand.
According to the Organic Trade Association, organic foods have become a $60 billion industry. And a quick scan of the grocery store aisles seems to confirm that. But the more people buy into it, the bigger the question becomes: What exactly does organic mean?
What does organic really mean?
War of the Words
Organic Farming: Advantages and Disadvantages
How to Understand Food Labels
What does organic really mean?
You’ve probably noticed by now that organic products tend to be pricey. That’s partially because federal certification costs money, and partially because the right to use the word organic requires meeting the USDA standards that were set in 2002. Even imported foods have to be up to government snuff before they can be called organic.
The USDA rules are pretty stringent. To be certified as organic, farmers can’t use prohibited synthetic fertilizers, pesticides, or hormones for three full years before applying. Further, any animals they have must be raised on organic foods. Genetically modified crops are a no-no, as are farming practices that cause high levels of pollution. Even the shipping and processing procedures are monitored. Organic foods have to be kept separate from non-organics until they arrive in the grocery store.
It’s up to the non-governmental agencies that are certified by the USDA to determine whether or not a product gets to use the organic label. They monitor every step of the system, and in the end, they’re the ones who slap that big “O” on the finished product.
Although the USDA criteria cover a lot of ground, many people feel the organic label should mean more. For example, some say it should cover how humanely the animals are treated. While many organic farmers treat their animals well as a matter of principle, the USDA’s stance on the matter was historically flimsy, though new regulations were recently put into place to help improve livestock welfare.
Organic farms also don’t have to be owned by mom and pop. Large-scale, corporate organic farms are now common. While critics complain that these big farms betray organic ideals by using monoculture practices that deplete the soil, the fact is that multinational conglomerates have quietly bought out many organic food suppliers.
War of the Words
Concerns about the USDA’s organic label have intensified in recent decades. In August 2008, the organization announced that 15 organic monitoring agencies weren’t implementing USDA standards and threatened to close them down if changes weren’t made within the year. In 2023, the USDA again strengthened the oversight and enforcement of organic regulations.
The fact that non-organic foods have been allowed to slip under the organic label has also frustrated groups. Until 2007, it was permissible for only five predetermined non-organic ingredients to appear in certified organic products, and even then, they could only make up 5 percent of the total ingredients. Dozens of non-organic ingredients have been given a pass, including several food colorings, pig-intestine sausage casings, and hops. This has pushed some hardcore organic lovers over the edge. Tired of fighting for control of the label they created, some want to replace organic with new terms, such as authentic food and conservation agriculture.
Organic Farming: Advantages and Disadvantages
These days, there’s another debate raging around organic foods. Although they may benefit health-conscious consumers in the Global North, critics say organic foods don’t help the rest of the planet. Agronomist Norman Borlaug, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1970 for introducing life-saving farming techniques to poor countries, doubts that organics can feed the world. He maintained that the problem is output. A 2002 study published in Science found that while organic farms use 50 percent less fertilizer and 97 percent fewer pesticides than conventional farms, they produce 20 percent less food. Borlaug believed that if the entire world switched to organic farming, we’d need three times as much farmland to feed everyone.
But organic supporters say this is bogus. The Minnesota Institute for Sustainable Agriculture points out that hunger is more about poverty and access to food, problems that have nothing to do with pesticides and artificial fertilizer. What’s more, the data on output isn’t cut and dry. In 2000, after reviewing multiple studies that compared organic and conventional farms, Christos Vasilikiotis of UC Berkeley found that organic farms kept up with their chemically dependent counterparts, so long as they were run efficiently.
Right now, only one thing is certain about the future of the organic-food industry: As long as there’s organic food being processed, there will be arguments about how best to label it.
How to Understand Food Labels
Need a dictionary to understand the labels on your food? Well, it won’t help. The hair-splitting semantics of the food industry could dumbfound the best of linguists. Lucky for you, we’ve broken it down right here.
Label: “100% Organic,” featuring the classy USDA seal
What’s inside? Nothing but USDA-certified organic ingredients.
Label: “Organic,” with the USDA seal
What’s inside? Food made with at least 95 percent USDA organic ingredients.
Label: “Made with organic _______,” without the USDA seal
What’s inside? Food made with at least 70 percent USDA organic ingredients.
Label: “All-Natural” or “Natural”
What’s inside? That depends. By USDA standards, “natural” meat can’t contain artificial flavoring, coloring, chemical preservatives, or synthetic ingredients, but the animals can be raised with hormones and antibiotics. Other foods with the “natural” label? That’s tougher. It’s supposed to mean there are no synthetic or artificial ingredients, but nobody officially monitors the process.
Label: “No Chemicals Added”
What’s inside? Nobody knows.
CHICAGO — Much has changed in the US organic food and beverage sector since the US Department of Agriculture National Organic Program (NOP) was established in 2000. And 2024 will bring more changes, everything from stricter regulations to a growing demand for imports.

To ensure organic remains a reliable certification for shoppers, NOP issued its Strengthening Organic Enforcement (SOE) rule that went into effect on March 20, 2023. Operations and certifiers must fully comply with the rule by March 19, 2024.
The SOE closes loopholes that had enabled ingredients that do not meet NOP standards to enter the organic supply chain, leading to fraud. Key updates include requiring certification of more of the businesses at critical links in organic supply chains.
Previously, only operations involved in producing, processing, packaging and labeling organic products required certification. The SOE requires buyers, sellers, brokers and traders to be certified.
“The USDA estimated 4,000 to 5,000 companies would need new certification,” said Nate Ensrud, vice president – US technical services, certification and food safety solutions, FoodChain ID, Fairfield, Iowa. “Many organizations think they are exempt when they are not. It’s the middle layer of the supply chain that is of primary concern.
“Over the last three months, the net change in USDA NOP certified organic operations in the US was essentially zero. A non-compliant company not only affects its own business but others in the organic supply chain. Based on the USDA NOP data, I believe non-compliance is going to happen and be disruptive.”
Another potential disruption is with imports. The situation will look far different than the backlog of cargo ships at ports that occurred during the pandemic. Non-compliant imports will be returned to their country of origin or have to be sold as conventional product, suggesting there’s a chance organic supply will not meet organic demand.
That’s because the SOE requires organic certificates for all organic imports, along with recordkeeping and traceability through the Organic Integrity Database. With many of the most-sought organic ingredients being imports, this has been a tedious task, but the industry believes the result will be worth it.
“The goal is to protect organic integrity and bolster consumer confidence in the USDA organic seal,” said Jennifer Tucker, deputy administrator for USDA NOP.
Maintaining the integrity of the program, in turn, should fuel continued growth of organic foods and beverages, a sector that peaked at $61.7 billion in sales in the United States in 2022, according to the Organic Trade Association, Washington. Inflation raised costs across the entire food supply chain and boosted prices in the grocery aisles; thus, similar to overall food and beverage sales, the value of organic sales grew even as the growth in the volume of sales for some categories slipped.
“Organic has proven it can withstand short-term economic storms,” said Tom Chapman, chief executive officer of the OTA. “Despite the fluctuation of any given moment, Americans are still investing in their personal health, and, with increasing interest, in the environment, organic is the answer.
“Organic is at that right intersection of environmental and personal health. Organic brings together the interest in human health and a healthy environment, and that offers organic a positive pathway forward and will help organic businesses withstand challenges in the future.”
The most sought organic ingredients
Inflation has forced many organic shoppers to be selective. Conventional bananas and oranges, for example, with their protective skins, may be deemed acceptable by the organic shopper on a budget, but fresh berries and tomatoes, not so much.
Meanwhile, certain ingredients are sought by organic shoppers because their sourcing resonates with the shopper’s personal values. One is cocoa and the chocolate made from it.
That’s because the conventional cocoa industry has a dark side, which includes environmental impacts of how it is grown, harvested and processed, along with the use of child labor and the low wages paid to workers. Consumers perceive organic chocolate to be natural, healthier and better quality than non-organic chocolate, according to research from Cargill, Minneapolis, and is fueling growth of organic chocolate.
The global organic cocoa market was valued at $8.3 billion in 2022 and is projected to grow at a compound annual growth rate of 3.3% to reach a value of $11.5 billion by 2032, according to Future Market Insights, Valley Cottage, NY. While it is growing, the market for organic cocoa is only about 0.5% of global cocoa production.
“Consumers have learned about these issues and are now seeking products that align with their values,” said Aaron Iverson, national sales manager, Global Organics, Cambridge, Mass. “They understand that organic cocoa is grown in a more sustainable way without the use of synthetic additives. This resonates with health-conscious consumers.”
Research from Barry Callebaut, Zurich, shows consumers are becoming more environmentally conscious and looking for chocolate produced in a way that is perceived as sustainable and ethical. Almost 7 out of 10 consumers prefer chocolate brands and products that enable them to do good for people and the planet, according to Barry Callebaut. Organic certification supports such efforts.
“Organic” means the chocolate was produced using only organic methods and contains a minimum of 95% organic ingredients. For some marketers and consumers that’s enough. Others want more.
Agostoni, a chocolate brand from Icam SpA, Italy, produces 100% organic chocolate made with all organic-certified ingredients, which include the cocoa liquor, cane sugar, cocoa butter, vanilla extract and soy lecithin. Icam controls the entire production chain, from the plantation to the finished product. The traceable powders, chips, chunks and other formats are produced following an ethical and sustainable approach.
Dr. Bronner’s, Vista, Calif., now offers regenerative organic certified salted dark chocolate. The confection is made with a blend of regenerative organic certified ingredients, including cocoa from Ghana and Ivory Coast, cocoa butter from Congo, bourbon vanilla from Madagascar and coconut sugar from Indonesia.
Organic plant-based proteins are another growing category, said Iverson. And all plant-based proteins are available with organic certification.
“The future of plant based is with clean and simple ingredients,” Iverson said. “Organic certification gets you there.”
Iverson added, “And everything coconut is booming, the milk, the cream, the sugar, the nectar, even the aminos. Coconut aminos are similar to soy sauce, with an umami, savory profile, with a hint of sweetness but no coconut flavor.”
Coconut aminos are derived from the fermented sap of a coconut palm tree and sea salt. They may directly replace soy sauce in a formulation and the organic-certified labeling offers a better-for-you proposition.
Organic sugars such as coconut sugar also are popular. In the better-for-you consumer’s mind, organic sugars provide permission to consume at a time when some view sugar negatively.
Approximately three out of four consumers try to limit or avoid sugars to improve their diet in general, according to the 2023 Food and Health Survey from International Food Information Council, Washington. Still, sugar remains the preferred sweetener choice over low- and no-calorie sweeteners. Enter organic.
Organic cane sugar, the most common, comes in forms such as brown, confectioners, turbinado and white. Brazil-based Natíve, one of the largest global producers of organic cane sugar, is adding value to its product portfolio with a new regenerative organic certified cane sugar.
The certification was made possible because of the company’s Green Cane Project. It focuses on soil health and biodiversity and integrates sustainability at all levels of the operation, according to the company. Green cane harvesting is accomplished by using mechanical harvesters to separate the sugar cane leaves and tops from the sugar-bearing stalk. The process replaces the destructive practice of burning sugar cane fields.
While organic cane sugar is trending in new product development, it’s organic coconut sugar that is garnering the attention of food formulators. It is a natural sugar made from coconut palm sap, which is the sugary circulating fluid of the coconut plant. It is not palm sugar, which is similar but made from a different type of palm tree.
Coconut sugar is made through a two-step process that is simple and appeals to the better-for-you consumer. A cut is made on the flower of the coconut palm. The liquid sap is then collected into containers and heated until most of the water has evaporated. The end product is brown and resembles granulated raw cane sugar.
Coconut sugar’s claim to fame is that it retains some of the minerals and phytonutrients found in the palm tree. And while it contains the same four calories per gram as other sugars, it has been shown to have a lower glycemic index.
When it comes to finished products being developed with organic ingredients, baby and toddler foods are big. Serenity Kids, Austin, Texas, a marketer of shelf-stable baby and toddler foods is rolling out World Explorer Pouches, which offer an international twist to standard baby food, according to the company. The meat-based line provides a culinary adventure honoring dishes from around the world, including Argentina, Japan, India, the Mediterranean, Mexico and Thailand. The World Explorers line is formulated with regeneratively farmed meats and organic vegetables, herbs and spices. Varieties include free-range chicken coconut curry, grass-fed beef chimichurri and wild-caught salmon teriyaki.
The regenerative angle
Across all organic ingredients and whole foods, the topic of sustainability has entered the conversation, as sourcing ingredients farmed in a manner that considers environmental and social impacts is a way to further differentiate organic foods to shoppers. Enter regenerative organic certification.
To be certified regenerative organic, farmers must demonstrate their farming practices take soil health and animal welfare into consideration and that farm workers are treated fairly. The farming practices have been shown to improve crop yields, reduce pests and increase biodiversity.
“We’re confident that a growing number of households want to select regenerative organic products for their personal and family health but also for the long-term sustainability of our planet,” said Ted Robb, co-founder, New Barn Organics, Fullerton, Calif., which now offers regenerative organic certified almond milk and pasture-raised eggs.
Chicago-based SPINS attributes the growing appeal to regenerative organic to the fact shoppers’ preferences have become more values driven. For the 52 weeks ended Nov. 5, 2023, unit sales of products labeled organic were down 4% across combined natural and conventional channels, while unit sales of products sporting regenerative organic certification were up 39%.
SPINS also said “as the dairy industry has long battled with the image of being bad for the environment, we see products that are certified regenerative organic buck the trend. Consumers are willing to pay more for dairy products that have the regenerative organic certification.”
Regenerative organic certified dairy ingredients are helping brands differentiate. Cheddies, Austin, Texas, partnered with Alexandre Family Farms, Crescent City, Calif., to create a formulation in which one serving of the cheese crackers provide 6 grams of protein.
Once Upon a Farm, Berkeley, Calif., also is working with Alexandre Family Farms and has launched no-sugar-added organic A2/A2 Whole Milk Shakes. To further demonstrate the opportunity in organic baby and toddler foods, Once Upon a Farm is adding three new snack items in bar, puff and melts formats.
“Having started with refrigerated, cold-pressed pouches seven years ago, consumer feedback was overwhelming in asking to bring our high standards, clean nutrition and fresh taste to a shelf-stable snack,” said Cassandra Curtis, founder and chief information officer. “We believe all food for babies and toddlers should be packed with wholesome real ingredients, taste great and be convenient for busy parents. Our new snacks deliver on all three fronts, promoting self-feeding and important developmental milestones.”
Is organic farming an environmental health solution?
Organic farming is on the rise, according to a 2019 Pew Center article. Which is no surprise since research has shown that increasingly more consumers believe that organic food is better for their health and the environment. But recent coverage of the knock-on effects of organic farming has put this stance into question, showing that farms neighboring organic operations often increase their pesticide use. And, organic farming requires more land than conventional farming.

Organic food is a common feature of many grocery stores, and the decision to buy conventional or organic produce comes with a variety of ethical and political baggage. 

When comparing conventional produce with organic, it can be challenging to differentiate between the two. They often look the same and provide the same nutritional benefits, so why would you pay more for organic food? This tip sheet explores the environmental and health implications around organic farming so reporters can accurately frame the practice’s impact. 

An integrated approach to agriculture
Organic farming considers environmentally friendly practices with the sustainable use of natural resources. It has various types of certifications, with the USDA Certified Organic label being one of the most rigorous and recognizable. 

The certification indicates that the food has been grown in accordance with set standards which prioritize conserving local biodiversity, responsible resource management, healthy soil use and species diversity. 

As health journalists, we have to sift through tons of PR from both the organic and conventional farming industry, as they each claim great benefits for human and planet health. In the past, shoppers have primarily chosen organic foods to avoid pesticides and safeguard the health of their families from chemicals like glyphosate, a common herbicide that the International Agency for Research on Cancer classified as “probably carcinogenic to humans.” Conversely, the US EPA considers glyphosate as “not likely to be carcinogenic to humans” and came to this conclusion by relying on registrant-commissioned, unpublished regulatory studies. While avoiding pesticides remains important for many shoppers, more consumers are looking toward organic farming as a way to lessen their impact on the environment.

 A 2019 study found that 73% of global consumers said they would change their habits to reduce their environmental footprint, and agriculture accounts for approximately a quarter of the world’s greenhouse gas emissions. This shift of perception around organic farming highlights the importance for health reporters to cover this topic so that readers can put their good intentions in the right place. 

Pros and cons of organic farming
Analyzing the research on organic farming’s effect on greenhouse gas emissions is complicated, and the health benefits can be unclear as there is inconclusive evidence that organic produce is more nutritious. 

For example, in organic food, there is less pesticide residue than on conventionally-grown produce, but the use of herbicides is regulated within a level that is safe for consumption by the US EPA. The honest answer is, no one can say with certainty whether buying organic is better than conventional. 

A 2020 study published in Science found that there needs to be major reductions in emissions from food and agriculture in order to meet the Paris Agreement global warming goals. 

Synthetic pesticide use is itself a contributor to climate change, and fumigant use has been shown to contribute to nitrous oxide, a greenhouse gas many times more potent than carbon dioxide. The holistic approach to organic farming has produced evidence that the practice benefits soil, human, plant and wildlife health, but some critics are concerned about industrial-scale organic farming. 

In a 2019 MIT Technology review article, James Temple asserts that organic farming is worse for climate change because of how much land farmers would need to use to maintain current crop yields. The critique centers on the fact that organic farming produces a lower yield and would therefore demand more land and resources, replacing natural areas and forests. 

For how ubiquitous the term organic is in grocery stores, the U.S. still has a proportionally small amount of organic farmland. Data from the Certified Organic Survey shows organic farmland acreage has not grown beyond 1% of the total U.S. farmland. These figures are far less than the EU’s acreage for organic farming, which increased from 5.9% in 2012 to 9.9% in 2021.

As more research comes out about the pros and cons of organic farming, health reporters will need to provide diligent coverage so that PR and marketing don’t idly capture the minds and dollars of readers. Below are some resources that can help inform reporting on organic farming. 

Is Organic Worth It? Registered Dietitian Weighs In

People are usually surprised to hear that I usually don’t go out of my way to buy organic food all the time. Don’t get me wrong, I go to farmer’s markets for local and sustainable produce as much as possible, and there’s no kidding that food quality is important. However, this doesn’t mean that slapping “organic” on something means that it’s automatically better. Let’s delve deeper to explain why.

Any produce is better than no produce
The biggest issue with “organic” labeling and promoting organic foods as better than others is that it makes healthy eating seem stressful rather than attainable. It scares people from eating conventional produce out of fear that it’s “dirty” or is less nutritious. These are two claims not rooted in evidence. The former is an especially important thing to touch on because eating all produce (conventional or organic) runs the risk of encountering bacteria.

Additionally, organic produce is inaccessible for millions of Americans. From college students to low-income families to people in food deserts, there are lots of people who cannot always afford to pay the extra money for the organic stamp of approval. Personally speaking, I’d rather use my grocery budget to buy more fruits and veggies than buy less of them labeled as “organic.”

)rganic certification is often unattainable for small farms
If you have a local farmer’s market that you go to, you’ll notice that a lot of produce stands don’t explicitly label their products as organic, even if they are. For small farmers, obtaining organic certification isn’t always a feasible choice because the legal process is time and money-intensive.

Certification can cost farmers upwards of $2,800 per year, and like everything else, prices have increased over the years. It makes sense that some farmers will choose to work without the label even if they meet all of the practice standards to make it official. Farms at local markets tend to have some of the freshest produce that you can find, so I won’t let the lack of “organic” on their signage stop me.

Food companies have mastered the art of labeling their foods in a way that appeals to a “health-conscious” buyer. There are organic crackers, chips, cookies, candies, and more out there on the market. They often cost more and make a consumer think that they’re “better” than normal versions of these items. Both of these varieties still contain excessive amounts of things like added sugar, salt, and fat. In other words, they can still negatively influence your health even if the flour or sugar used is organic.

Bottom Line
Organic produce can have some perks, but the label itself doesn’t automatically mean better. Fear mongering conventional produce makes it difficult for people to navigate healthy eating, and it makes it seem like you “have” to buy organic or else your food doesn’t count as healthy. This is not true. If you don’t already buy organic and/or are on a budget, it’s a better use of your money to buy as much affordable produce as you can rather than buying the most expensive kind. As a dietitian, I try to shop locally whenever I can to support local farmers who have fantastic quality standards (without an organic label). However, whenever I go to a regular grocery store, I find that it’s a much better use of my budget to buy conventional produce.
Hanoi faces difficulties in developing organic agriculture
Although several organic agriculture models have been developed in Hanoi, generating positive results, the city still faces some obstacles in expanding the models to large-scale commercial production.
Hanoi (VNA) – Although several organic agriculture models have been developed in Hanoi, generating positive results, the city still faces some obstacles in expanding the models to large-scale commercial production.

The city has over 197,000 ha of agricultural land but organic farming has just been practiced on about 2,000 ha of crops and over 10 ha of aquacultural areas.

Vu Thi Huong, director of the Hanoi Agriculture Promotion Centre said that the economic efficiency of organic agricultural production models is usually 10- 20% higher than conventional production. 

By participating in the models, farmers have their knowledge and skills improved. They also change the way of thinking and working to better meet consumers’ demand, she said, noting that qualified organic products can enter supermarkets, convenience stores, and collective kitchens more easily.

Talking about the difficulties that organic agriculture is facing, Trinh Thi Nguyet, director of Dong Phu Organic Agriculture Cooperative in Hanoi’s suburban district of Chuong My said that the costs of organic agriculture production remain high, making organic products less competitive than conventional ones.

Moreover, organic products don’t look good or yet have differences to attract consumers, which results in instable consumption.

General Director of Bao Minh Agricultural Processing and Trade Joint Stock Company Bui Thi Hanh Hieu said that to overcome difficulties and expand organic agricultural areas, farmers need support in accessing scientific and technological applications and meeting organic production standards.

Authorities also need to pay more attention to building brands for local organic products and helping farmers connect with businesses and boost trade promotion.

In efforts to limit the negative impacts of agricultural production on the environment, Hanoi has been implementing a project on organic agriculture development in the 2021-2025 period, under which organic agriculture will be combined with eco-tourism and hi-tech organic production.

Deputy Director of the city’s Department of Agriculture and Rural Development Nguyen Manh Phuong said that to promote organic agriculture, localities need to strengthen communications to raise public awareness of organic products, particularly among producers, businesses and consumers.

Meanwhile, localities need to focus on developing concentrated organic agricultural production areas and key products, creating favourable conditions to attract investors to organic agricultural models in closed chains from production, processing to distribution.
G﻿rass-fed, pasture-fed, organic, free-range and no added hormones - if you're not quite sure what type of meat you're buying at the supermarket, you're not alone.
Farmers are calling for more transparency on red meat labelling to reduce confusion and to ensure customers know exactly what they are getting.
NSW farmer and Our Cow co-founder Dave Tarrant said he had seen a huge shift in people wanting to know where their groceries were coming from.
"People are becoming more health conscious and they want to know where their food comes from and they want to feed their family something that hasn't had all the nasties put into it," he said.
So what does the labelling mean?﻿
Tarrant said the three most common categories on the supermarket shelf were usually broken up into economy, grass-fed and organic.
Economy beef﻿ is lower quality due to a range of factors, including age at the time of processing (older than 3.5 years in NSW) and the cut of meat.
Cattle that are categorised as economy are usually grain-fed and not free-range.
"Grass-fed is an ﻿animal that's been grazing in its natural habitat on native and improved pastures," he said.
"Whereas an animal that's been grain-fed, it's not a natural diet of livestock... and the fat content of the animal changes. 
"The animals aren't usually in a pasture like in an open paddock… while they're consuming grain, they are usually in a confined feedlot."
Grass-fed beef, also known as pasture-fed, contained 2.7 grams less fat per 100 grams than the same amount of grain-fed beef, according to a National Institute of Health study.
There is no official certification for grain-fed or grass-fed beef, ﻿meaning Australian-raised beef labelled "grass-fed" can often be given grain before slaughter, according to Tarrant.
"Because they haven't been fed in a certified grain-fed feedlot they can be still classed as grass-fed animals," ﻿Tarrant said.
"They can be fed grain for under 70 days and still be classed as grass-fed."
About 80 per cent of beef sold in supermarkets is industrially farmed.﻿
Meat can be deemed organic by a certifying body that audits properties for chemical use, feed additives, herbicides, pesticides and hormone growth.
Australian farmers are allowed to use growth hormones to increase the weight of cattle but it's regulated to ensure it is safe for consumers.
All meat has naturally occurring hormones ﻿and the term "hormone-free" refers to meat that has been raised without any further added.
Beef isn't the only industry of concern; only five per cent of pork is certified free range in Australia, according to the Queensland government.
It's a fact shoppers may not notice.﻿
﻿"I just think it (the labelling) needs to improve to give consumers a better understanding of what these animals are going through," he said.
"It just gives consumers a better choice… to feed their families."
Tarrant is capitalising on this change among consumers by creating Our Cow to deliver grass-fed, organic and free-range meat and seafood boxes across Australia, to ensure farmers are paid fairly and consumers can support them directly.
What is the law?﻿
The Australian Consumer Law has standards for ﻿Country of Origin Food Labelling and free-range eggs but apart from those two, the law does not require food products to contain any specific information about their labelling.
An Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC)﻿ spokesperson said some consumers made purchasing decisions based on claims about various attributes of products.
"Some businesses respond to these consumer preferences by changing their production methods to provide products that have such attributes," the spokesperson said.
"However, where businesses don't change their production methods but still make claims that their products have these attributes, they gain an unfair competitive advantage.
"Under the Australian Consumer Law businesses must not mislead or deceive consumers in their advertising or marketing, including product labelling and packaging."
The ACCC has previously taken action in relation to misleading food labelling claims but could not comment on the specifics of grass-fed meat labelling.﻿
A NSW primary industries department ﻿spokesperson said all mandatory food labelling was set out in the Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code.
"Grass-fed meat labelling is not a mandated requirement in the Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code," the spokesperson said.
"Labels provide important information to people about the food they are buying, helping them to decide what to buy, store and prepare properly, meet dietary needs, prevent adverse or life-threatening reactions to foods, such as allergies."
The spokesperson said the Food Standards Code included the general labelling and information requirements relevant to all foods.

